

Critique
	* A critique is a formal statement of opinion based on the analysis and evaluation of a human effort.
	* The process of critique is typically applied to works of art and literature, but it can equally be applied to works of engineering, science, landscaping, etc. 
	* Critique can be positive or negative, or both.

NB. You may not be asked in every critique to assess a work, only to analyze and interpret it. If you are asked for a personal response, remember that your assessment should not be the expressionof an unsupported personal opinion. Your interpretations and your conclusions must be based onevidence from the text and follow from the ideas you have dealt with in the paper. Remember also that a critique may express a positive as well as a negative assessment. Don't confuse critique with criticize in the popular sense of the word, meaning “to point out faults.”
		

9th Grade
Project: Critique #1 -- Bless Me, Ultima
	A. Analysis and evaluation of
		i) one (1) major theme, and 
		ii) the character development of one (1) major character
	B. The major theme options for this critique are 
		i) Nature,
		ii) Mysticism,
		iii) Religion and Faith, and 
		iv) Identity and Cultural Heritage
	C. The major character options are 
		i) Antonio, 
		ii) Ultima, 
		iii) Gabriel, and 
		iv) Maria
	D. To write your critique follow the structure given in "The Writing Process: Writing a Critique", Hunter College, City University of New York
	E. The document must be >500 words, double-spaced, typed, and in .pdf format
	F. The final document is due Oct 18 (Friday). Drafts should be turned in the week before if comments are desired before the final grade.



Writing Your Critique
I. Set up your document
		name, due date, Marron English (upper RH corner)
		Title
		Intro
		Analysis of <Element 1>
		Analysis of <Element 2>
		Conclusions

	A. select your i) main theme, and 2) main character
	B. start thinking ==> Who? What? When? Where? Why?
	
II. Intro
	A. Who is the author?
	B. Why is the book important
	C. What will your critique cover?
		
III. Analysis of <Element 1>
	A. write description bullets about your main theme
		What is it? Describe it!
	B. write analysis bullets about your main theme
		When and where does it appear? Who is involved? Why?
	C. write interpretation bullets about trotroyour main theme
		What do YOU think about how the the theme is presented? What is your opinion based on the analysis?

IV. Analysis of <Element 2>
	A. write description bullets about your main character
		Who are they? Describe them!
	B. write analysis bullets about your main character
		When and where they appear? WHat do they do? Why?
	C. write interpretation bullets about your main character
		What do YOU think about the how the character is presented? What is your opinion based on the analysis?
			
V. Conclusion
	A. overall interpretation of the elements studied
	B. consideration of those elements within the context of the work as a whole
	C. critical assessment of the value, worth, meaning, or significance of the work, both positive and negative

	